---
title: "Impacts of Increased Precipitation on Soil Water Geochemical Fluxes from the Active Layer Using Rainfall Simulator Experiments on the Seward Peninsula, Alaska"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2023-agu-rfs
venue: "AGU Fall Meeting 2023"
date: 2023-12-15
location: "San Francisco, CA, USA"
citation: '<b>Thomas, L.</b>, Dillard, S., Thaler, E., Renner, C., Zhang, Y., Conroy, N. A., Bennett, K. E. (2023). &quot;Impacts of Increased Precipitation on Soil Water Geochemical Fluxes from the Active Layer Using Rainfall Simulator Experiments on the Seward Peninsula, Alaska.&quot; <i>AGU Fall Meeting 2023</i>, San Francisco, CA, Dec. 15 2023.'
---
Precipitation magnitude and frequency are projected to increase across the Arctic, but the impact on permafrost remains a large uncertainty. Also unknown are any changes in the biogeochemical flux from soils to surface and subsurface waters due to the increased precipitation. To address the unpredictability and difficulty of measuring the impacts of discrete rainfall events in Arctic environments, we deployed the novel, variable intensity NGEE Arctic Rainfall Simulator (NARS) at a remote field site on the Seward Peninsula of Alaska. Two rainfall simulation experiments were conducted in a tussock tundra environment underlain with continuous permafrost, to represent one short duration, high-intensity storm and one long duration, low-intensity storm. Control sites were set up near the experimental plots to collect baseline data on soil moisture, soil pore water chemistry, and temperature prior to simulations. During the experiments, we collected interflow water samples at regular intervals and later analyzed these samples for major anions, major cations, and dissolved organic carbon (DOC). We also collected and analyzed soil pore water pre- and post-simulation at the rainfall simulation sites. We compare the effects of both experiments on geochemical export from the active layer to evaluate the effects of rainfall on permafrost conditions. During the short-duration, high-intensity experiment, we observed a pulse of total organic carbon (TOC), DOC, sodium, and iron. After rainfall ceased, fluxes of total inorganic carbon (TIC) and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) decreased to background levels. The rainfall simulation experiments provide insights into how increased rainfall may affect permafrost and interflow water biogeochemistry in the Arctic. Our findings will help inform the representation of rainfall events in permafrost regions in earth systems models.
