---
title: "Assessing Floodplain Organic Carbon Storage Over Large Spatial Extents and Investigating the Effects of Human Alteration"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2025-rmhrc-floodplaincarbon
venue: "79th Annual Rocky Mountain Hydrologic Research Center Meeting 2025"
date: 2025-11-07
location: "Boulder, CO, USA"
citation: '<b>Thomas, L.</b>, Lininger, K. B. (2025). &quot;Assessing Floodplain Organic Carbon Storage Over Large Spatial Extents and Investigating the Effects of Human Alteration.&quot; <i>79th Annual RMHRC Meeting</i>, New Orleans, LA, Dec. 17 2025.'
---
River corridors are active components of the global carbon cycle, and floodplains can store more carbon per area compared to uplands. Previous research has shown that floodplain organic carbon (OC) is primarily stored in riparian vegetation, downed large wood, and soil. Across the U.S., floodplain ecosystem services and functions have been affected by human modifications, including dams, water withdrawals, agriculture, and land development. Current understanding of floodplain OC storage is limited, as few existing studies quantify OC stocks in all 3 sources, assess the impacts of alteration, or estimate OC across large spatial scales. To quantify OC stocks and understand how they have been affected by human alterations in the Southwest and Midwest U.S., two regions where floodplain OC has not been comprehensively studied, we combined geospatial analyses and field sampling techniques to assess OC stocks along the San Pedro River, AZ and the Rum River, MN.

For each floodplain, we classified high-resolution ecogeomorphic units based on vegetation, hydrology, and morphology using publicly available datasets, Google Earth Engine, and GIS software. We used additional geospatial analyses to categorize reaches as more- or less-altered based on land cover. We planned field sampling locations within each floodplain using the ecogeomorphic unit and alteration classifications, and we collected soil cores, alluvial sediment depths, vegetation surveys, and downed wood surveys. To estimate wood volume, we measured wood jams, accumulations, and downed wood using a variation of the line-intersect method at each site. We collected sediment cores that will be analyzed for grain size, OC content, and soil moisture, and we measured tree dimensions within plots to calculate aboveground biomass from allometric relationships. We used these field data to calculate OC stocks at 36 locations within each floodplain. Stocks will later be used to scale-up to the entire floodplain based on ecogeomorphic unit classifications. Here, we present preliminary findings of OC stocks found in aboveground biomass and downed wood in altered and unaltered portions of each floodplain. This work provides a replicable workflow that can be used to scale-up floodplain OC stock estimates over broad geographic extents.
